Whether this my great pleasure to welcome all of you to this graduation program for the
140th class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead, and we're just so happy to have
our auditorium here in Patterson filled with so many happy servants of Jehovah.
And the brothers informed me that all of the satellite locations, including, and this
just a few, Canada, Curacao, Jamaica, and Puerto Rico are all successfully tied in.
So we're happy to have all these ones tied in with us for this happy occasion.
And the brothers tell me, too, that among us we have guests from at least 40 different
countries.
In fact, six of the seven continents are represented here.
We've got ones from Africa, Asia, Australia, Europe, North America, South America, only
Antarctica is not represented.
But who knows, next year that may change.
But it's really good to have this international gathering of brothers and sisters for this
happy occasion.
Now we can proceed into our joyous occasion by standing and singing together one of our
beautiful new songs that Jehovah is your name based on Psalm 8318, that song number 138.
The theme for my opening little discussion is three precious expressions, use them generously.
And especially we're going to direct these comments to you dear Gilead students.
Now when you think of that theme, you may think of this scripture in Proverbs.
Let's go to Proverbs chapter 16.
When you think of precious expressions, we want to use generously.
You may think of this Proverbs 16 and take a look at verse 21.
It says, the wise and heart will be called understanding, now notice.
And the one kind in speech adds persuasiveness.
And literally in the footnote, the one sweet of lips.
And if you think about it kind and sweet of lips, it does persuade, doesn't it?
And these three expressions that we're going to discuss are kind and they're sweet and
they will powerfully persuade.
But now what is our first precious expression?
Well done.
Now let's talk about this.
When we express sincere commendation by saying well done or similar words to family members
or fellow worshipers, we indicate we're not taking for granted the good work that they're doing.
We appreciate it.
And like Jehovah's always good, isn't it?
To have an appreciative attitude.
Colossians 3.15 says, show yourselves thankful.
Didn't say just be thankful.
Show yourself thankful.
And one way to do that is by offering sincere commendation.
Think about it.
If we sincerely commend one, then it may move them to even more fully.
Keep up the good work they're doing.
It may even move them to do it more fully.
See, it is motivating that expression to commend someone.
But now what about this question here?
What if a certain fellow worker, perhaps a fellow elder, never, ever gives us a word
of commendation, never any commendation?
Should we reason?
Well, I won't commend him either.
You might recall what brother Mark Numer said some years ago in his talk at a Gilead graduation
program, he made the comment, don't become the thing you hate.
He warned, if you see behavior that you hate and you become that way, you have become
what you hate.
Now that's a powerful point, isn't it?
See, we don't want to become what we don't like or what we even hate.
And if you think about it, if we go ahead and give that one who never gives us commendation,
sincere commendation, who knows, maybe in time it'll rub off on him that appreciative
attitude.
But in any event, we'll know we've done the right thing, we'll feel good about it, and
Jehovah will bless us for that.
At Luke 638, Jehovah tells us to practice giving.
So not just occasionally, but make it happen.
And one way to do that is giving commendation.
And of course, our giving should never be dependent upon receiving.
As we always remember, there's more happiness in giving than receiving.
So dear Gilead students, please generously use
those words to commend your fellow workers.
Use it to strengthen your mate, to inspire young people.
Use it to motivate Bible students.
Use it to hearten your fellow workers.
Those words can work wonders.
But now let's go to our second short, but precious expression.
I'm sorry.
When we apologize by saying, I'm sorry, perhaps even adding, please forgive me.
We show how very highly we value the unity with our brothers.
We want unity with them.
And sincere apologies from the heart with the right tone of voice can again work wonders.
They are powerful.
Think about, if you will, the sincere apology that Abigail gave to David when he was on his
way to slaughter the household of Nehbo.
Now, that apology was given from her, even though she shared no blame for the stupidity
of her husband.
But first Samuel, chapter 25 says, she fell at David's feet.
She said, my Lord, let the blame be on me.
Pardon, please, the transgression of your servant girl.
Well, that's sincere apology what did it do?
It transformed a man of vengeance immediately into a man of peace and compassion.
Or think about the sincere apology of the prodigal son and Jesus parable in Luke chapter 15.
That heart felt apology immediately melted the heart of the father.
And he accepted the son right back into his household.
Well, just a couple of examples of the power of a sincere apology.
But now, here's a question.
What if the problem primarily lies with the offended person?
They're just too sensitive.
Now, that's why they were offended by us.
Should we still apologize?
Well, if you think of Jesus' words at Matthew 5, 23, and 24, he said, leave your gift at the altar.
Go make peace with your offended brother.
Now, he didn't say go make peace if your brother's offense is legitimate.
If there's a basis for it now, go make peace.
No.
He said, leave your gift, go make peace.
It was unqualified, wouldn't it?
And when we do this, we show that unity with our brothers is worth a whole lot more than who is right or who is wrong.
But think of this.
It's usually best not to apologize by saying something like, if I offended you,
or if you were offended, well, then I'm sorry.
You know, that could come across like you're trying to pin the blame on them for being offended.
But in contrast, a sincere apology from our heart with no attached subliminal messages.
See, that's what we'll powerfully reach the heart of that one and enable us to make peace with them.
But what quality would you say, especially, will enable us to go and make that sincere apology?
Is it not humility?
If we're even a little bit prideful, those words, I'm sorry, please forgive me,
tend to hang up right here in the throat, don't they?
It kind of like choke on those words.
But if we're genuinely humble, those words flow freely,
and we can make peace with our brother, think about this.
A proud person finds it difficult to apologize even when he knows he is definitely in the wrong.
On the other hand, a genuinely humble person can apologize even if he is the one who is not primarily at fault.
And what is often the quickest shortcut to humility?
Is it not prayer?
And this admonition we've discussed, especially, applies to dealing with our mates, if we're married.
Here's what an elderly man named Jim said.
He said, I apologize to my wife, even for trivial matters.
Every since she had a serious operation, she gets distressed easily.
So I regularly put my arm around her and say, sorry, love, I didn't mean to upset you.
Like a plant that is watered, she perks up immediately.
Well, what a fine experience.
Truly power in this sincere apology.
In fact, it makes us think this beautiful outcome of Proverbs 1624,
where it says, pleasant sayings are a honeycomb, like a sweet,
I should say, sweet to the soul and a healing to the bones.
So it's like a honeycomb, it's sweet, it's healing,
and that's certainly true of the case of a sincere apology.
But now let's get our third potent but precious expression that you want to use generously.
I love you.
Now let's talk about this in some lands and in some cultures,
fathers never ever say to their wife or children that they love them.
Now that's sad, isn't it?
And if you think about it, it's unscriptual.
It is something that the Bible should overrule culture or custom.
See, and making that expression of endearment.
Even though we personally may find it difficult or awkward to feel and express affection
for another one, would you hope us help?
Whether we're a male or female, we can overcome that problem, we can't wait.
And we can become imitators of Jehovah and Jesus.
In fact, the Bible illuminates that Jehovah and Jesus
certainly share expressions of affection for each other.
And apparently they've done this for billions of years.
Open up to Proverbs 8.
And notice how Jesus describes the loving relationship between himself and his father.
Proverbs 8, verse number 30, he says,
Then I was beside him as a master worker.
I was the one, and notice he was a specially fond of day by day.
And then it indicate an interchange of expressions of affection.
I was the one he was fond of day by day.
I rejoiced before him all the time.
What a fine example of expressing this love between individuals.
Just one example of Jehovah expressing his love for humans.
Jehovah said to the Israelites as recorded at Jeremiah 31, verse 3,
He said,
I have loved you with an everlasting love.
That is why I have drawn you to me with loyal love.
Or think about in the book of John.
Jesus repeatedly, on the night of his betrayal,
he expressed his love for his disciples.
Repeatedly, you can read about it there in the book of John.
Or think about the conversation that Jesus had with Peter
as recorded in John 21, 15 through 17.
Now, it's quite revealing, quite interesting, that conversation.
Jesus, three times for emphasis, required Peter to express himself
as to whether Peter loved Jesus and had affection for him.
Now, the wording of the account is interesting.
It appears, the way it's worded, that this manly, masculine,
former fisherman, Peter had some difficulty
and openly expressing affection for another person,
even if that other person was Jesus.
But Jesus basically compelled him to verbalize it, to say it,
to spit it out, if you will.
He required him to say it, say, and it was good for Peter.
You think about it, it was good that Peter articulated those words.
And you can be sure it made it a lot easier for him later
to express affection for others.
Very interestingly, we never want to underestimate the power
of those words I love you.
Use them to encourage and endure yourself to your mate,
to your Bible students, to young ones, your brothers and sisters.
And of course, make sure that those words are never just merely a platitude
but a true, genuine expression from what is in your heart,
appropriately, Peter.
And of course, this was after that conversation, Jesus had with him,
we said before, but recorded in the first Peter 122,
you know what Peter said?
He said, with unhypocritical, brotherly affection,
love one another intensely from the heart.
So use those words, dear ones, to enhance your love for others
and enhance their love for you.
Well, there we have three short but precious expressions.
And as we said, we encourage you to use them generously.
Well done.
I'm sorry.
I love you.
At appropriate times you may even be able to combine
expression number three, I love you
with expression number one or expression number two.
And if you do that, that will even further intensify
the impact beneficially of your words.
But again, think of Proverbs 16, 21,
the one kind in speech.
Literally, the one sweet of lips adds persuasion.
But now this entire Gilead graduation program
has been prepared with the idea of helping you to become more
useful to Jehovah and his organization.
And it'll also help you, if you really pay attention,
resolve to apply what we have here help you to be happier
and more effective in your assignments.
So with this in mind, we're going to give our attention now
to brother Kent Fisher.
And he is going to address an interesting,
very intriguing, in fact, theme.
His theme, will your tiny stitches strengthen others?
Brother Fisher, our interest is peaked.
Well, I wish all of you in the audience
could see the students sitting here in the front row
because they're a beautiful sight.
All dressed in suits, dresses, or garb native
to the countries that they've come to Gilead from.
What a good-looking group you are.
I have a question for you.
As you were putting on your clothing this morning,
did you stop and think about how your clothing was made?
Probably not.
For most garments, it involves a skilled tailor
cutting fabric according to a pattern,
and then sewing those pieces together
with a machine or by hand, with thousands
and thousands of tiny stitches.
And if that tailor did his work well,
this seam will now be as strong or stronger
than the material itself.
And the tiny stitches, almost invisible.
You'll never notice them.
Did you know that now you have an increased opportunity
to do a very similar work?
Turn with me, please, to Philippians chapter two.
And let's read verses three and four.
Starting partway through verse three, it says,
but with humility, consider others superior to you,
as you look out not only for your own interests,
but also for the interests of others.
Simply put, these verses are about being unselfish,
about discerning what others need
and then filling that need ahead of your own.
And you know that's exactly what each of you
has been doing in life up to this point.
And you are wonderful spiritual men and women.
It's been a delight for those of us here at Patterson
to have you with us for the last months
while you've been in school.
But you know now as you return to your assignments
or you take on new responsibilities,
you're taking with you the effect of your Gilead training.
How often in your Gilead classes
did you extract scriptural principles from accounts
and then talk about a practical application
of those principles?
Those principles are now like a spool of spiritual thread
that you can use to strengthen your brothers and sisters.
At times the needs of others may seem very small
or insignificant or even something they should just get over.
Yet when you unselfishly stop what you're doing
and fill those needs,
it will be like putting tiny stitches in the seam of a garment.
Those you help will be stronger and in turn,
they will use that strength to help others
in Jehovah's organization.
Often of course the stitches we put in
to strengthen others are made with our tongue.
And like a sewing needle, our tongue is very sharp.
Proverbs 12, 18 says,
thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword
but the tongue of the wise ones is a healing.
And I think you would all agree that while we have healed
people with our tongue at times,
we've also done a little bit of stabbing
along the way as well and a thoughtless way.
Now you're going to see that as you gain
more responsibility,
the words you say will have even greater impact
than they have in the past.
So the question is,
our theme, will your tiny stitches strengthen others?
We're going to discuss four scriptures
that highlight ways you can put in stitches
that will strengthen others.
The first example is found in Jesus' illustration
of the talents.
That's found in Matthew 25,
but you'll remember it,
as the master returns and reviews the work of his slaves,
he uses the exact same wording for two of his slaves.
He says,
well done, good and faithful slave.
Enter into the joy of your master.
Well, as we heard highlighted already by our chairman,
commendation is powerful,
but it's not automatically strengthening.
Have you ever had the circumstances
where you are busy working
and someone walks by and says,
keep up your good work.
And you're thinking to yourself,
do they even know what work I do?
For commendation to be strengthening,
it must be sincere, it must be specific.
The publication, keep yourself in God's love,
expressed it this way.
A sincere word of commendation lets you know
that someone notices you,
that someone cares about you,
and that what you did was well worth the effort involved.
Such reassurance builds your confidence
and motivates you to work even more diligently in the future.
What's that telling us?
That every time you sincerely commend someone
for what they're doing,
you're putting in tiny stitches that strengthens them.
Example number two.
Proverbs 12-25 says,
anxiety in a man's heart weighs it down,
but a good word cheers it up.
Well, those who are anxious or discouraged
need encouragement.
They need to know that you see what they're dealing with,
that you care about them and that you want to help.
As the watch star once put it,
at this point in the race for life,
our brothers need not critics,
but friends to cheer them on to victory, well said.
Each and every time you use the principles
you have learned from God's word,
to encourage someone to cheer up their heart that's weighed down,
you're putting in tiny stitches that make them stronger.
Example three.
Galatians 6-1 says in part,
if a man takes a false step before he's aware of it,
try to readjust him in a spirit of mildness.
You know, counsel can be embarrassing.
It can be embarrassing to receive,
but frankly, it can also be embarrassing to give to others.
And at times, it's unnecessarily embarrassing
because the one who gives the counsel waited far too long
to speak up.
Why not make it your aim to give lots and lots
of tiny reminders?
In English, there's a saying,
a stitch in time saves time.
What does that mean?
It means that when a small mistake is corrected,
that it never gets larger,
and it never requires all the time and effort
to correct it that it would have taken
if it had gotten larger.
When you give others reminders in a spirit of mildness,
and they sense that you genuinely care about them,
you put in stitches that will strengthen them greatly.
Example number four.
After the faithful man Job was approved for his wrong viewpoint,
he says, I make a retraction,
and I do repent in dust and ashes.
Well, his brother let emphasized,
an apology is a powerful thing.
But how is it also strengthening to others?
Let's illustrate.
A circuit overseer made a mistake
while he was presiding over a large audience
filled with elders.
When the mistake was pointed out, what did he do?
He acknowledged the mistake, he corrected it,
and he sincerely apologized to the brothers.
Well, what was the result of that?
Did they all lose their respect for the brother?
Did they suggest that maybe he wasn't qualified
for his assignment anymore?
Not at all.
One brother who was there said,
when I saw him admit his mistake
in front of all those elders, it impressed me greatly.
I respected him a lot more after that apology.
His example taught me how important it is
to recognize my own shortcomings.
So if it will be your pattern
to humbly admit your mistakes and apologize,
others will respect you more,
but it will also build their respect
and love for Jehovah's organization.
These may not seem like big things
in some ways they're not, to command,
to encourage, to give loving reminders or to apologize.
However, please never underestimate
the strengthening effect of every little tiny stitch
that you put in to strengthen your brothers.
And brothers, especially for you,
never forget the value of the freeness of speech
that so doing will bring to you
when you have to handle weighty matters
or give counsel to individuals or to large audiences.
No fair warning, as you make thousands
of tiny stitches to strengthen others,
unselfishly applying what Philippians chapter two said,
your work's not always going to be seen.
It may be invisible.
In fact, those you strengthen may not even remember
that you did so, and that's okay,
because Jehovah knows.
Jehovah sees everything you say and everything you do
to strengthen your brothers and sisters around you.
And when he looks at his organization,
he will know that it is stronger,
that it is more united, that it is increasingly beautiful
in part at least to the thousands of tiny stitches
that you have made.
Well, it's obvious the students really appreciated
that practical advice.
Well, now we're going to turn our attention
to Brother Jeffrey Jackson of the governing body.
And here's an interesting theme,
are you avoiding spiritual short-sightedness?
So, Brother Jackson, we're looking forward very much
to seeing how you develop this theme.
Do you suffer from myopia?
Well, some research tells us that in certain countries,
30 to 40% of the population suffer from this.
What is it?
Short-sightedness or near-sightedness.
In other words, a person can see very clearly
what is just around them,
but it's very difficult for them to see clearly
what is far away.
And of course, that problem can be helped
by having eyeglasses like I have.
We also know that in a idiomatic way,
this expression can refer to someone who is so focused
on just one thing that they miss the whole big picture.
And in English, we have an expression,
the person can't see the forest for the trees.
So they can see each tree,
but they don't step back and look at the whole picture
and see the forest.
Could something like that happen to us spiritually speaking?
Yes, it could.
The Apostle Peter reminds us about this.
If you turn with me to the book of 2 Peter chapter one,
if we look at verse five and read on from there,
we'll notice how the Apostle Peter under inspiration
helps us to avoid spiritual short-sightedness.
And verse five, he starts off by saying
that with every earnest effort,
we should develop certain qualities.
And you notice some of them there, self-control, faith,
endurance, godly devotion, and in verse eight,
notice he says, but if these things exist
in you and over flow, they will prevent you
from being either inactive or unfruitful.
Now you dear students, soon to be graduates
of the 140th class of Gilead.
We know this is exactly what you've been doing
the last few months, building up your spirituality,
trying to develop these qualities that the Apostle Peter
has told us about, and we commend you for that.
It's interesting that in verses five through eight,
the Apostle Peter uses the pronoun you, you, you,
as if he's speaking to us individually.
But in verse nine, he changes the pronoun
and starts talking about a third person, he.
Let's see what he says there in the beginning of verse nine.
For anyone lacking these things,
so that is the spiritual qualities,
the spirituality involved with them,
that person is blind,
shutting his eyes to the light.
And if you look down to the footnote,
what do you see it says, blind, short, sighted.
And interestingly, the Greek word used here
is the basis for the English word, myopia.
So when we think about this, the new old translation
translates this expression very nicely,
very accurately, because it indicates an action
on the part of the person.
To illustrate this, imagine you're driving
late in the afternoon towards the sun that is setting.
The sun is shining so strongly in your eyes,
what do you tend to do?
You squint, your eyes close.
Then what happens, what's the danger?
You only see what's just there in front of you
and you can't really see too far ahead.
Well, spiritually speaking,
this is what the Apostle Peter is warning us about.
We never want short sightedness,
just looking at the physical things around us
and forgetting the bigger picture,
the spiritual picture that involves our relationship
with Jehovah God.
Now let's use two examples,
they're contrasting examples,
to show us how dangerous this is
and what it really means.
Turn with me, please, to first Samuel chapter four.
And here we have the negative example,
first Samuel chapter four.
It refers here to the Israelites
in the days of high priest Eli
and at that time, they were fighting the Philistines
and they just had been beaten, defeated.
Now what happened, well,
first Samuel chapter four verse three,
notice their reaction.
When the people returned to the camp,
the elders of Israel said,
why did Jehovah allow us to be defeated today
by the Philistines?
Now that's a very good question.
I'm sure each one of us would have asked that same question
if we were there at that time.
It's a good question because it highlighted
the relationship with Jehovah.
But now did they analyze the relationship with Jehovah
and see was Jehovah angry with them or not?
Well, notice what they did, let's read on.
They say, let us take the ark of Jehovah's covenant
with us from Shiloh so that it may be with us
and save us from the hand of our enemies.
What had happened, short-sightedness,
they were looking for something physical
that was just there close on the ark of the covenant.
If we have the ark,
Jehovah will have to bless us wrong.
We know what happened.
They were defeated again
and they actually lost physically the ark of the covenant.
What should they have done?
Analyze their relationship with Jehovah,
that spiritual element, the bigger picture.
Now let's look at a good example
in the book of a second Samuel chapter 15.
And this tells us about King David.
At this time, David was dealing with a very difficult problem.
His son Absalom had rebelled against him.
David was fleeing the city of Jerusalem
along with his followers and supporters.
He was standing in the valley of Kidron
just at the side there of Jerusalem
and the people were passing across.
And do you know what happened next?
Zadok came down with what?
The ark of the covenant.
Now how did David react?
Well, let's have a look at verse 25 and 26.
But the king said to Zadok,
take the ark of the true God back to the city.
If I find favor in the eyes of Jehovah,
he will also bring me back and let me see it
and it's dwelling place.
But if he should say,
I have found no pleasure in you,
then let him do to me whatever seems good in his eyes.
What a different viewpoint.
You see, David realized
whether the ark was with him or not physically,
it didn't really make any difference.
Why?
The important thing was his relationship with Jehovah God.
What a beautiful example of someone who could see
beyond what was just there physically in front of him
and emphasized his relationship with Jehovah.
Now, you dear students, soon to be graduates.
How can that apply to you?
Well, while you've been here at Gilead,
you've been building up your spirituality.
Now, Dad, you've been thinking very seriously
about your relationship with Jehovah.
And now, as you go back to your assignments,
what do you need to do?
Not think, well, I was trained at Gilead.
I'm an elder, I'm a better light.
I'm a missionary, I'm a traveling officer.
I must be okay.
Uh-uh, that sounds like you're taking hold
of the ark of the covenant, saying,
Ah, I can rely on this physical thing.
No, let's be like King David, who realized,
no matter what service privilege we have,
whatever assignment we have, that in itself
doesn't prove that our relationship with Jehovah is good.
Remember the Apostle Peter helped us to see
it's the spirituality that we gain
from putting on the spiritual glasses, we might say.
How do we do that?
Reading God's Word, the Bible daily, meditating on it,
thinking carefully about it,
and then praying to our loving Heavenly Father, Jehovah.
So doing that, it's as if we overcome this short-sightedness.
We're not just thinking of what we see around us,
but we see the whole picture, the big picture,
the picture that involves our relationship
with Jehovah God.
So you dear students of the 140th class.
As brother let's us, we love you.
We know that you're a special group of persons
and we know that Jehovah loves you.
So wherever you go, whatever you do,
whatever problems you face, remember your relationship
with Jehovah, treasure your spirituality,
and in that way you will avoid spiritual short-sightedness.
Oh, we certainly appreciate your good work
as a spiritual optometrist, brother Jackson.
We needed that.
But now we have brother David Schaefer,
who serves as a helper to the teaching committee,
and he has also a very interesting theme.
What do you want?
Now I've been asked that question many times,
but I've never heard a talk on that subject.
Brother Schaefer, please.
What is your heart's desire?
Does it matter?
When you dedicated your life to Jehovah,
you didn't lose your free will.
Ecclesiastes 11.9 encourages young ones,
follow the ways of your heart
and go where your eyes lead you,
an acknowledgement that wishes, dreams, goals
are not necessarily bad.
At the same time, that verse ends with a condition.
But know that the true God will bring you
into judgment for all these things.
So while we enjoy the freedom to make decisions,
we recognize that our choices matter to Jehovah.
What do you want?
Each time that question appears in the Bible,
it reveals something about the motives
of the person who answers the question.
Sometimes it reveals a beautiful condition of the heart.
At other times, it reveals that a person
is more interested in his preferences than in truth.
And at still other times,
it reveals that the person has no idea what they wanted.
That was the case with the daughter of Herodius,
who danced at Herod's birthday party
and pleased him so much that he asked her,
according to Mark chapter 6, verse 22,
ask me whatever you want.
And I will give it to you up to half my kingdom,
her indecision left her susceptible to evil influence.
But recall a very different answer to this question
found at 1 Kings chapter 3,
the start of Solomon's kingship.
Jehovah appeared to him in a dream
and said in verse 5,
ask what you would like me to give you.
Happy that Solomon chose wisdom
instead of riches and glory,
Jehovah gave him all three.
If only Solomon had continued to want
an obedient heart.
Then at 2 Kings chapter 2 and verse 9,
the same question is posed again,
Elijah to Elijah, ask what you want me to do for you.
Like Solomon,
Elijah asked for something that would help him
in his service to Jehovah.
He asked for an identity as Elijah's successor, his heir.
He asked for the same courageous spirit
and Jehovah granted that request.
Well, like Elijah,
you two are facing a new assignment.
Maybe it's all together new,
that maybe it's back to where you were before,
but with a new focus with more responsibility.
Will you feel overwhelmed, inadequate?
One brother recommended for Gilead recently
was described as studious, modest and humble
before he came.
But after his return,
he was reported on as more mature,
more aware of the needs of others, more capable.
Another recent graduate who had been serving
on a Bethel department as the overseer for years
before coming to Gilead returned a different person,
a kinder overseer, a better shepherd.
Well, just as Jehovah strengthened Elijah
with identity, with courage.
So he strengthened these students, graduates,
and their wives.
And so he will strengthen you if that is what you want.
What do you want?
Turn with me please to John chapter 16.
Let's move forward in time from Elijah's day
to nice and 1433 CE.
Jesus final night with his disciples.
He says in John chapter 16, verse 24,
until now you have not asked for a single thing
in my name, ask,
and you will receive so that your joy may be complete.
Now that marked a turning point in the history
of prayer.
From 1513 BCE, if a person wanted Jehovah God
to hear his prayers, he had to recognize
that Israel was Jehovah's chosen nation.
From 1026 BCE, a person had to recognize
that the temple was Jehovah's arrangement
for accepting sacrifice.
But now the situation had changed.
That situation, that system was temporary.
But now the shadow was about to give way to the reality.
From henceforth, a person's relationship with Jehovah
would be founded on obedience to Jesus Christ.
After Jesus said that to his disciples,
did their minds go back to the events
that took place just a few days earlier,
recorded in Mark chapter 10?
Let's turn there together.
Mark chapter 10.
Jesus poses the same question two more times.
First, beginning in verse 35, James and John,
the sons of Zebedee approached him
and said to him, teacher, we want you to do for us
what we ask of you.
He said to them, what do you want me to do for you?
They replied, grant us to sit down one at your right hand
and one at your left in your glory, glory.
Now, that was what they wanted.
The request was selfish, but it did happen
to reveal faith in the reality of the kingdom.
But what they wanted almost caused them
to lose sight of Jehovah's purpose and their role
in connection with it.
Could that happen to us?
Could our preferences cloud our perception?
What if we imagine one thing regarding a current
or a future assignment, but were presented
with something entirely different?
What do we do?
What if we receive counsel about our attitude
as did James and John?
James and John learned from the counsel.
They developed a balance.
They mastered the self-sacrificing spirit.
What do you think?
Did Jesus grant their request?
No, he did something better.
In verses 38 through 45, he imparted the understanding
they would need to fulfill their role.
And what happened next?
Provided in an indirect way an object lesson
in how they could show the depth of their desire
to please Jehovah.
Mark chapter 10, verse 51.
Jesus again asks the same question.
He posed to James and John this time to Bartimaeus.
Jesus said to him,
what do you want me to do for you?
The blind man said to him,
Rebony, let me recover my sight.
And Jesus said to him, go,
your faith has made you well.
Have you ever encountered a real beggar, not a con artist,
but someone who is utterly destitute.
They know that they will simply perish
except for the mercy of strangers.
Sad reality of our times.
But we can learn something from a beggar.
Bartimaeus did not make one simple request
and then go silent.
Verse 47, we find him shouting.
Verse 48, at this, many began rebuking him,
telling him to be silent.
But all the more he kept shouting,
in verse 50, he leaps to his feet.
He echolocates Jesus and he pleads his case.
Now, doesn't that remind you of the kind of effort
that's needed to satisfy our spiritual needs?
Jesus' words, Matthew chapter 5, verse 3, happy,
are those conscious of or beggars for the spirit,
conscious of their spiritual need
for the kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.
Some have said that Gilead has heightened the degree
of their consciousness in this regard.
For them, it's helped them to more keenly perceive
their utter spiritual destitution.
Take that with you.
Be a Bartimaeus.
Don't give up.
Don't give into pressure to stop begging.
Don't give Jehovah any silence
until his purpose is completely accomplished.
Unlike the daughter of Herodius,
you have willingly chosen to make Jehovah's will your will.
Like Solomon, beg for wisdom,
but don't give up in the pursuit of it.
Like Elisha, beg for Holy Spirit and for courage,
but doing so in Jesus' name.
Like James and John keep the kingdom
hope burning brightly.
Learn from your mistakes without losing your fire
and you will inherit the kingdom.
May you dear students of the 140th class keep the words
of Psalm 37 verse four and its footnote constantly before you.
Find your greatest joy in Jehovah
and he will grant you the desires of your heart.
Thank you very much, brother Schaefer.
That was very helpful.
But now we have another helper to the teaching committee
and brother Numer also serves as the overseer
of the Theocratic schools department.
And he's gonna take us on a trip,
his theme journey with Jehovah, brother Mark Numer.
When you take a journey, you can go alone
or you can take someone with you.
As you journey on the road to life,
be determined to take Jehovah with you
and stick with him even if the route takes an unexpected turn
you did not anticipate.
And if you do,
Jehovah will take you to places spiritually.
You have never been before.
And to places you cannot get to on your own
and you will experience a blessing that only he can give.
And our discussion now will focus on Jacob.
Why?
Because he took Jehovah with him
as he traveled through life.
Now let's see the lessons you can learn.
And we begin by opening up to Genesis chapter 25.
We're going to read verse 23.
25, 23.
And Jehovah said to her, Rebecca,
two nations are in your womb,
two peoples will be separated from within you
and the one nation will be stronger than the other nation.
And the older will serve the younger.
Jehovah saw that the older he saw would serve the younger Jacob.
Now, even though this promise came from Jehovah God,
it did not spell a trouble free life for Jacob.
There would be trials ahead,
but Jacob was determined to stick with Jehovah.
Even when the journey took him through hard times.
For example, there was a time in Jacob's life
that he stumbled into a patch of injustice.
He wanted to get married on the wedding night.
His uncle Laban substituted his older planar daughter,
Leah, for his beloved Rachel.
Chapter 29 verse 25 describes this scene.
29, 25.
In the morning, Jacob saw that it was Leah.
Now, that is an unexpected turn in his root with Jehovah God.
But what would Jacob do?
Here he says to Laban, what have you done to me?
It was not for Rachel that I served you.
Why have you tricked me?
What would Jacob do now?
Would he rise up in arms against such betrayal?
It gets worse.
Verse 26, the very next verse, now Laban makes excuses.
He makes excuses by saying, it's not our custom
to give the younger before the older.
It's not your custom.
Outrage, Jacob could have said, look, we had a contract.
I worked seven years for you.
I've waited 84 years to get married
and this is what you do to me.
And now you say, it's not our custom.
Couldn't you have at least told me ahead of time
that it's not our custom?
But how did Jacob respond?
He agreed to work another seven years.
Why didn't he walk away?
Why didn't he walk away from such deceit and mistreatment?
There's the question, why?
Because Jacob knew that Jehovah cannot be deceived.
He understood that Jehovah saw what was happening
and this knowledge helped Jacob to prefer peace to strife.
Instead of being stubborn and demanding his rights,
he left the matter in Jehovah's hands
confident that he saw what happened
and that he would handle it in due time.
And remember, Jacob was not harmed by doing so.
In fact, in just seven years,
Jacob was blessed with several children.
But if he had stood his ground
and insisted on having only Rachel, I want Rachel.
He may have only had two sons instead of 12.
So again, where did this journey with Jehovah take him?
Jehovah used this wrong to build a great nation out of Jacob.
The Messiah came through Judah, Judah,
who was Lee's son, not Rachel's.
The Messiah was brought forth despite a great injustice.
You see, Jacob traveled with Jehovah
and Jehovah brought him to a spiritual place
he could not get to on his own.
Now we find Jacob with a 14-year work contract with Laban.
The next seven years could have embittered Jacob.
Jacob's own family suffered from jealousy and resentment.
Laban continued to exploit him by unfairly changing
his wages 10 times.
But rather than being fed up,
he maintained the right spirit and attitude.
It is amazing this Jacob.
He didn't adopt a cynical bitter attitude.
In fact, chapter 31 and verse 6,
it says that I served Laban with all my power.
And with all those injustices with all my power,
because he did not face this test alone.
He had Jehovah at his side.
This is the point.
He was journeying with Jehovah.
Look at verse 5.
He sensed it. He knew it.
He got it.
The God of my father has been with me.
Oh, this journey with Jehovah.
Was it easy? No. Was it possible?
Yes, he stuck with Jehovah.
Look to Jehovah for strength.
Jehovah God wants you and me
to learn from this true life story.
Think about it.
Jehovah could have arranged for Jacob to be born first.
But consider what Jehovah is teaching us
by arranging for the older to serve the younger.
He is teaching us that we don't receive blessings
through effortless inheritance.
And this is the lesson we want you to learn.
That journeying with Jehovah does not mean
you will have an easy journey.
But if you stick with Jehovah,
he will take you to places spiritually,
you cannot get to on your own.
So hold on to the promise that Jehovah will reward you
for doing what is right.
Even if it means making a temporary sacrifice
or suffering injustice, leave the matter in Jehovah's hands
and then pay attention to how he works things out.
Let Jehovah help you rise above fleshly tendencies
to look out for self.
Imitate Jacob, like Jacob, prefer peace to strife.
For example, at Bethel, your Bethel,
when you see a department that gets along, there is a cost.
It's not for free.
Someone is paying a price.
Let that someone be you.
Peace is the result of people going out of their way
to maintain peace.
It's not an accident.
Someone is sacrificing self interest.
Let that someone be you.
Why not?
Take the time also to encourage those
that you know are going out of their way to make peace.
You know who they are, do not ignore them.
Perhaps the one that volunteers
to take a smaller workspace,
though they have this seniority for a larger one.
Or the one that feels they've been overlooked
for a privilege they've been passed over,
and yet they don't stop working with all their power
in whatever work they are given.
Their journey with Jehovah reveals who they are.
And Jehovah is taking them to wonderful spiritual places.
Jacob's challenges do not end with Uncle Laban.
At 97 years old, and after 20 years of strife and tension,
no doubt Jacob urns for peace as he heads home.
But his journey with Jehovah now brings him face-to-face
with yet another lesson.
Here's the situation.
His brother Esau, and his 400 men are advancing toward Jacob.
All Jacob remembers is that Esau told Mom he would kill me.
Jacob is up all night, tired and scared.
Facing such a crisis,
imagine the relief when an angel appears.
Good, an angel.
Surely this angel is here to strengthen me.
However, it seems that the angel wants to pick a fight.
Now, chapter 32 and verse 24.
Here it is.
The man began to wrestle with me until the dawn broke.
You want to wrestle with me now?
Bad timing.
But journeying with Jehovah in this case
resulted in a crippling injury for Jacob.
He would limp the rest of his life.
But Jehovah saw fit for Jacob to have this experience
at this time in his life.
Perhaps to teach him humility.
A constant reminder not to be overly exalted
about his God-given prosperity,
or the blessings that he would receive in the future.
Now, Jacob didn't understand why Jehovah was allowing this.
But he showed deep appreciation for spiritual things.
Look what happens in verse 26.
Even though his hip was dislocated, the man is in pain.
And yet, verse 26 says,
I'm not going to let you go until you bless me.
Point, Jacob held on tighter after he was hurt.
The man is hurt and he clung tighter to Jehovah.
What was Jacob's blessing for doing this?
A name change.
Verse 28.
Your name will be no longer Jacob, but Israel.
But to Jacob, that was precious.
He knew the name change had deep meaning.
Abram to Abraham, Sarah to Sarah.
And now Jacob to Israel, think about it.
After Jehovah, no name in scripture is used more than Israel.
True, many of those occurrences refer to the nation,
but the name of the nation, including spiritual Israel,
came from the man, Jacob.
Because Jacob held tight despite the pain,
despite the hurt.
Jehovah brought him to a spiritual place.
He could have never reached on his own.
The lesson for you.
At times, your blessings are disguised as trials.
In order for you to be more useful to Jehovah God,
he may allow a series of events to unfold in your life
and the events could be painful.
Perhaps you receive counsel that hurts.
Your reputation is questioned.
Your spirit may be broken, your dignity pummeled.
When the strongest instinct is to give up, walk away.
I don't need this.
Hold on tight.
Don't let go.
Kling to Jehovah, no matter the hurt.
Learn the lesson of humility.
Pray, stay busy.
Keep moving forward with God's spirit-directed organization.
Fight for that reward.
What reward?
For a future blessing that only can come from Jehovah.
At times, we may feel like Jacob when he told Pharaoh,
the years of my life have been few and distressing.
However, and despite all the hardships
that this man experienced just before his death,
what did the man Jacob say?
He said, the true God has been shepherding me
all my life.
What a journey.
His journey with Jehovah God brought him
no resentment, just gratitude.
Now in conclusion, I have two points I want you to remember.
Not for a written exercise,
but I want these two points to be indelibly etched
on your mind and heart.
One, like Jacob.
When you stumble into a patch of injustice
or disappointment or unfair treatment,
trust Jehovah will help you rise above fleshly tendencies
and he will help you to grow spiritually.
Let him take you past all the injustices
to great spiritual blessings.
It's the only way to come out a winner.
And when you experience a hurtful situation,
hold tightly to the promise that Jehovah God will reward you
in due time for doing what is right.
Stick to Jehovah.
Stick with him even through the rough neighborhoods,
the rocky roads, the uphill climbs,
he'll not only help you with the hard parts of the journey,
but again, he will take you to places spiritually,
you can never get to on your own.
That's the privilege, that's the point.
More than 3,700 years after Jacob's death,
let his life course please, we urge you
to continue to teach you no matter what circumstances
come your way.
Keep journeying with Jehovah.
Well, it's obvious the students really appreciated
that faith strengthening talk.
But now we're gonna have an opportunity to stand
and sing a song of praise to Jehovah.
We have song number 84, I want to.
And that's taken from Luke 513.
Song number 84, I want to.